<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="label">Part Four</h2>
			<h2 epub:type="label">The Magic Pilgrimage</h2>
			<hr class="chap"/>
			<p>
				<span class="pagenum">
					<a id="Page_152">[Pg 152]</a>
					<br/>
					<a id="Page_153">[Pg 153]</a>
				</span>
			</p>
			<h2>
				<a id="XIV">XIV</a>
			</h2>
			<h2 epub:type="label">The Dominant Urge</h2>
			<p class="drop"><span class="uppercase">I went</span> to Russia. Some thought I was invited by the Soviet government; others, that I was sent by the Communist Party. But it was not so easy to have the honor of an invitation or the privilege of being sent. For I was not one of the radicals abroad, important to the Soviet government; and I was not a member of the Communist Party. All I had was the dominant urge to go, and that discovered the way. Millions of ordinary human beings and thousands of writers were stirred by the Russian thunder rolling round the world. And as a social-minded being and a poet, I too was moved.</p>
			<p>But money was necessary so that I could go to Russia. I had none. I mentioned my object to James Weldon Johnson, then secretary of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. He suggested I might raise some money by selling special copies of my book of poems with signed photographs. And very kindly he placed at my disposal a select list of persons connected with the N.A.A.C.P. In that way a small number of copies of <i>Harlem Shadows</i> was sold. The price asked was five dollars. I remember that about six persons sent checks for ten dollars. One check was signed by Mrs. Henry Villard. Eugen Boissevain sent me one hundred dollars. Crystal Eastman gave me a letter as one of the editors of <i>The Liberator</i>, asking any radical who could to facilitate my getting to Russia. Just before I sailed James Weldon Johnson gave me a little farewell party at his residence in Harlem. A few of Harlem’s élite came:<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_154">[Pg 154]</a></span> Dr. DuBois, Walter White, Jessie Fauset, Rosamond Johnson, and from among downtown liberal intellectuals, Heywood Broun and F.P.A. of the New York <i>World</i>, John Farrar, who was then editor of <i>The Bookman</i>, and Ruth Hale. It was a pleasant evening and the first of the bohemian-élite interracial parties in Harlem which became so popular during the highly propagandized Negro renaissance period.</p>
			<p>I signed on as a stoker on a slow freighter going to Liverpool. Just as that time, Crystal Eastman also had booked passage on another boat to go with her children to London to join her husband. We had arranged to have a last meal together on the eve of my sailing. But I waited until near midnight and she didn’t appear. So I went out alone in Harlem, visiting the speakeasies and cabarets and drinking a farewell to the illegal bars.</p>
			<p>In one joint I met Hubert Harrison and we had together a casual drink. But I did not inform him or any of my few familiars that I was sailing for Europe the next day. Sentimental adieux embarrass me. I took a look in at Sanina’s for a brief moment. Late that night, when I got home with just enough liquor to fill me with a mellow mood for my next adventure, I found a tiny scrap of paper thrust into my keyhole:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<div>
					<p>Claude dear:</p>
					<p>I just dashed in to give you a hug and say goodbye⁠—Bon Voyage, dear child!</p>
					<p>Crystal<br/></p>
				</div>
			</blockquote>
			<p>I tucked the little note in a corner of my pocket book and have carried it with me all these years, through many countries, transferring it, when one pocket book was worn out, to another.</p>
			<p>
				<span class="pagenum">
					<a id="Page_155">[Pg 155]</a>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>Six years later, when I was in Spain, I received a copy of <i>The Nation</i> containing the announcement of beautiful Crystal Eastman’s death. It was sudden and shocking to me. I took her farewell note out of my pocket book and read it and cried. Crystal Eastman was a great-hearted woman whose life was big with primitive and exceptional gestures. She never wrote that Book of Woman which was imprinted on her mind. She was poor, and fettered with a family. She had a grand idea for a group of us to go off to write in some quiet corner of the world, where living was cheap and easy. But it couldn’t be realized. And so life was cheated of one contribution about women that no other woman could write.</p>
			<hr class="tb"/>
			<p>At Liverpool I left the freighter and went straight to London. There was a reunion with a few intimates of the International Socialist Club. Many of the members had left for Russia the year before to live there permanently. Also a number of British Communists were preparing to travel to Russia for the Fourth Congress of the Communist International.</p>
			<p>Arthur McManus, one of the Left labor men from the Clyde, was one of them. I asked if he could assist me to go to Russia. He was not enthusiastic, especially since I was once connected with the Pankhurst group, which was now out of favor at Moscow. McManus said that I should have been recommended by the American Communist Party. The more difficult it seemed, the more determined I was to make my way to Russia. One evening in a barroom, I heard a group of English comrades facetiously discussing Edgar Whitehead, the former secretary to the Pankhurst Group, saying that he was always landing something good in the movement. I heard them mention that Whitehead was in Berlin. He was liaison agent and interpreter for the English-<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_156">[Pg 156]</a></span>speaking radicals who were traveling to Russia. Whitehead had studied German in Berlin when he was a schoolmaster. He had been a leader of conscientious objectors during the last war. He was also my friend, and I thought I’d take a chance on his helping.</p>
			<p>The next day I took the channel boat to Ostend. Arriving in Berlin, I made inquiries and found Whitehead. He promised to get me through to Russia. That I was not indorsed by any Communist party did not matter to him. He was not a fanatic or dogmatist. In the days of our association together in London we often waxed satirical about Communist orthodoxy and we had often discussed the idea of a neo-radical magazine in which nothing in the universe would be held sacred.</p>
			<p>Whitehead started working for me. The intervening time I spent visiting the theaters. Expressionism was setting the pace. I saw the revolving stage for the first time and admired it. Also I visited many of the cabarets, which had sprung up like mushrooms under the Socialist-Republican régime, some of which seemed to express the ultimate in erotomania. The youngsters of both sexes, the hectic pleasure-chasers of the Berlin of that epoch (before Poincaré grabbed the Ruhr), were methodically exploiting the nudist colony indoors, which was perhaps more exciting than the outdoor experiments.</p>
			<p>One evening Whitehead announced that all was ready. The next day we drove in a taxicab to a rendezvous. We entered a house and passed into a large room in which there was a group of men. Four of them I identified as Russians. Whitehead introduced me as a <i>kamarad und neger dichter</i>. One sitting at a table spoke with a kindly smile. He asked a few questions in effortful English which I promptly answered. I said that I was not a member of the American Communist<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_157">[Pg 157]</a></span> Party, but that I was in sympathy with the purpose of the great Russian revolution. I said that it was primarily as a writer that I was interested in Soviet Russia and that I intended to write about it for the Negro press.</p>
			<p>I received back my passport and Crystal Eastman’s recommendation, which I had consigned to Whitehead. A visa for Russia was attached to the passport. I was told to prepare to travel at once. The next day I traveled with an English-speaking German to Stettin. There I slept that night at a hotel. The following morning I was taken to a pier, whence I embarked for Leningrad.</p>
			<hr class="tb"/>
			<p>Petrograd! Leningrad! When I think of that great city like a mighty tree shaken to its roots by a hurricane, yet still standing erect, and when I think of the proud equestrian statue of Peter the Great, proclaiming that dictator’s mighty achievement, I feel that the world has lost the poetry and the color rising like a rainbow out of a beautiful name since Petrograd was changed to Leningrad.</p>
			<p>Lenin is mightier than Peter the Great. But there is no magic in the name of Leningrad. There is magic in the name of Lenin, as there is splendor in the word Moscow. And perhaps Lenin himself, whose life was devoted to the idea of creating a glorious new world, might have, in appreciation of the will of Peter the Great to remake a nation, preferred Petrograd to remain Petrograd. Perhaps the spirit of Lenin might have been more adequately expressed in the erection of a brand-new city, rising out of that system to which he dedicated his life. Lenin without any suffix⁠—like a perfect ball of pure gold⁠—a city called Lenin.</p>
			<hr class="tb"/>
			<p>I saw Petrograd! Like a great tree, shaken to its roots by a hurricane and struck by lightning and somehow still stand<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_158">[Pg 158]</a></span>ing. Petrograd, half empty of its population and somewhat sad in the autumn. I saw the monuments of czars and nobles tumbled in the dirt by the proletarian masses. But intact and untouched they had left the beautifully proud monument of Peter the Great, a mighty symbol of individual will and majesty.</p>
			<p>
				<i>MOSCOW</i>
			</p>
			<p>
				<i>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Moscow for many loving her was dead⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">And yet I saw a bright Byzantine fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Of jewelled buildings, pillars, domes and spires</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Of hues prismatic dazzling to the sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">A glory painted on the Eastern air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Of amorous sounding tones like passionate lyres;</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">All colors laughing richly their delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">And reigning over all the color red.</span>
					<br/>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">My memory bears engraved the strange Kremlin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Of halls symbolic of the tiger will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Of Czarist instruments of mindless law⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">And often now my nerves throb with the thrill</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">When, in that gilded place, I felt and saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">The simple voice and presence of Lenin.</span>
					<br/>
				</i>
			</p>
			<p>I felt almost ashamed in those lean hungry years of 1922, when Russia was just emerging from a great famine, that Moscow should have stirred me in the way I have expressed it in this sonnet. Yes, I will admit that my senses were stirred by the semi-oriental splendor and movement of Moscow even before my intellect was touched by the forces of the revolution.</p>
			<p>After the war, the revolution and the famine, one’s mind had created a picture of a grim, harsh melancholy atmosphere.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_159">[Pg 159]</a></span> But it was all like a miracle, all that Byzantine conglomeration of form and color, shedding down its radiance upon the proletarian masses. It was like an <i>Arabian Nights</i> dream transforming the bleak white face of an Arctic waste.</p>
			<p>And the crowds tramping and sleighing through the deep snow spreading over all the land were really happier and friendlier than the crowds of New York and London and Berlin. Yet the people in Moscow were generally so poorly clad. There was so much of that Oriental raggedness that one does not see in New York and London and Berlin⁠—at least not on the surface. The scenes were so unexpected and strange that I even doubted at first whether they were not created by Communist discipline and Bolshevik propaganda. But when I mingled with the people I soon perceived that many did not even comprehend the true nature of Communism. Some of them could understand only that Lenin was in the place of the Czar and that he was a greater Little Father.</p>
			<p>I was soon brought down out of the romantic feeling of the atmosphere to face the hard reality of the American Communist delegation. Brazenly and bravely I had journeyed to Russia with some members of the British group. But now the American delegation had arrived with a Negroid delegate, a light mulatto. My presence was resented. The American delegation did not want me there. The delegation represented America, and as I had been passed with other Communists as a visitor to the Fourth Communist Congress, it was necessary that I should be indorsed by the delegation as an unofficial visitor. This the chairman refused to do. Instead, he desired that I should be sent out of Russia, back home.</p>
			<p>A fight was raging inside of the American delegation. A minority led by James Cannon wanted a legal American<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_160">[Pg 160]</a></span> Communist party, to carry on open propaganda among all the American workers. The majority, led by the chairman, was fighting to keep the American party illegal and underground.</p>
			<p>Rose Pastor Stokes was the main prop of the chairman. When she arrived in Moscow, still pretty and purring and sly as a puss, she immediately engaged me in conversation and casually asked if I did not think that an illegal Communist party was the best suited for America. I answered no, emphatically. At the time I did not know that the difference in the ranks of the American group was serious. Not being a party member, I was unaware of what was going on inside of the organization.</p>
			<p>Rose Pastor Stokes was one of the delegates who had just escaped from Bridgman, Michigan, during the police raid of August, 1922, when the illegal Communist Party held its convention in the open there in a beautiful romantic valley. Some of us of <i>The Liberator</i> thought that the Communists, being tired of staying underground, were feeling so pastoral and poetic that they couldn’t do better than hold their secret convention in the open air of the lovely Michigan country.</p>
			<p>Rose Pastor Stokes had said to me that it was necessary for Communists to take to the woods in summer to escape the iron heel of the capitalists. She was the wife of a millionaire, and perhaps knew more about the iron heel than poor proletarians. She admired that romantic novel of Jack London’s, <i>The Iron Heel</i>, and once told me that radicals could use it as a textbook of revolutionary organization in America. She was shocked and hurt that a few of us regarded the convention and the raid in Michigan as something like a comic opera.</p>
			<p>I remembered Mrs. Stokes’s spy mania, when I was on<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_161">[Pg 161]</a></span> <i>The Liberator</i>. She was doing secret radical work. She used to tell me stories of being followed by detectives, and of how she fooled them by taking refuge in the Hotel Plaza and the Hotel Astor; because the dicks wouldn’t imagine that a guest of such places was red. She was also working with a radical Negro group, and thought she was followed by Negro detectives in Harlem. One night I was at the apartment of my friend, Grace Campbell, when Mrs. Stokes came in to attend a meeting. She was breathless, and sank into a chair, exhausted. She asked for water, and Comrade Campbell hurried to get a glassful. Then Mrs. Stokes explained that a colored man had been watching her suspiciously while she was riding up on the subway, and when she got off the train he had attempted to follow her. She had hurried and dodged through the insouciant Harlem crowd and gone round many blocks to evade the spy.</p>
			<p>Said Comrade Campbell, “But Comrade Stokes, there aren’t any Negroes spying on radicals in Harlem. That colored man, maybe he was attempting⁠—kind of⁠—to get friendly with you.”</p>
			<p>Mrs. Stokes jumped right up out of her exhaustion: “What, Comrade? You <i>shock</i> me!” In her voice, and her manner, was the most perfect bourgeois expression of the superior person. Comrade Campbell said: “Why Comrade Stokes, I didn’t mean to insinuate anything, but any person is likely to be mistaken for something else.”</p>
			<p>So now in Moscow, before I was fixed in place as an unofficial observer, Rose Pastor Stokes had got it from me that I was opposed to the majority of the American delegation, and that was bad. Mrs. Stokes really believed that we were living through the period of the new Inquisition against radicals in America, and that those who did not believe that<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_162">[Pg 162]</a></span> were traitors to the cause. She hinted even that there was something suspicious about my use of my real name in Moscow. For all the American delegates had secret names. Mrs. Stokes’s own was Sasha. But some of us unorthodox comrade sympathizers preferred to identify her as The Red Red Rose.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile, the committee appointed to seat all delegates to the Fourth Congress was sifting credentials. It was headed by a repulsive type of strutting Prussian whose name is now forgotten, lost in the radical scramble for place and the shuffling and cutting of Communist cards⁠—and Leninist purges. Greater Red names than his have gone like the melted snows of yesterday.</p>
			<p>I was soon aware that the Prussian person had his severe blue eye fixed on me, as if I had been specially pointed out to him. I pretended that I had not seen that evil eye, but soon I was being bedeviled. I was thrown out of the Lux Hotel and found myself in a dilapidated house in a sinister <i>pereulok</i>. My room was bare excepting for an army cot, and cold like the steppes because of a broken window pane through which poured a Siberian draught. My first thought was to protect myself against pneumonia, and so I hurried to a store and purchased two blankets and a pair of the cheap warm and comfortable felt boots that reach to the thighs⁠—the kind the Russian peasants wear.</p>
			<p>In the room next to mine there was a Russian couple. The man spoke a little English. I complained about the state of my room and he agreed that the window should be fixed; but, said he, “Thousands of Russians are living in worse places.” It was a quiet, gentle, perhaps unintentional, rebuke, but immediately I felt confused and altogether ashamed. I became aware of the implications of my grievance, so petty<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_163">[Pg 163]</a></span> in the eyes of the “thousands in worse places” who had just come through an eight-year siege of war, revolution, counter-revolution and famine, with fields and farms devastated, factories wrecked, houses in ruins, no time and few funds for repairs.</p>
			<p>I remembered breakfasting on the train in Germany a few weeks previously. The countryside, misty brown in the early morning, was peaceful and beautiful; the train ran precisely on time; the coaches and dining car were in elegant shape, the passengers well dressed, the waiters in neat uniform. The breakfast was fine, but the cream that came with the coffee was barely whitened water. I had just come from America, where cream with coffee is a commonplace. And so, without thinking, I asked the waiter for cream. I said I would pay extra for it.</p>
			<p>The waiter said: “But Mister, we have no cream at all. They have taken away all our cows from us, and what little milk we have we must give to our babies.” Then I remembered that I had read somewhere that under the Treaty of Versailles the Germans had had to give up thousands of heads of cattle to the Allies. But I had never fully grasped the significance of that until I asked for cream with my coffee in Germany. (We are, the majority of us, merely sentimental about the suffering of others. Only when direct experience twists our own guts out of place are we really able to understand. I remember once hearing a nice comfortable bohemian noblewoman ecstatically exclaim: “<i>J’aime la souffrance! J’aime la souffrance!</i>” Yes! She loved vicariously the suffering of others.)</p>
			<p>“⁠ ⁠… Thousands in worse places.” A good room was as much of a luxury in Moscow in 1922 as a car is in America. A good room was the chief non-political topic of conversation.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_164">[Pg 164]</a></span> People greeted one another and said: “Do you have a good room?” in the same way we say, “How is your health?” One of the tidbits of those times was the joke that Mrs. Trotsky and Mrs. Zinoviev were at odds because one had a better apartment in the Kremlin than the other.</p>
			<hr class="tb"/>
			<p>Now my position was precarious. I wanted by all means to stay in Moscow and to attend the meetings of the Fourth Congress of the Communist International. But would-be delegates and visitors who were unwanted and undesirable were being ruthlessly dealt with. Some were accused as spies and counter-revolutionists. To the Russians, spying was a real menace. It meant sabotage of revolutionary property, attempted assassination of officials, and working to overthrow the Soviets. They could not understand that when an English or an American Communist accused certain persons of being spies, his idea of spying was romantic and akin to eavesdropping.</p>
			<p>Aware of the way in which things were going against radical dissidents, I acted quickly. I had a friend high up in Bolshevik circles in the person of Sen Katayama. Sen Katayama was <i>the</i> Japanese revolutionist. He had been a member of the Second International and knew all the big men of the conservative British and continental labor movement. He was an old friend of Lenin, Zinoviev, Bukharin and Radek, and had gone over to the Third International at its inception.</p>
			<p>Sen Katayama had been a student at Fisk University, the southern Negro school. He was small, dark-brown, with intensely purposeful features which were nevertheless kindly. I met him when I was working on <i>The Liberator</i>. He dropped in one day and introduced himself. He took me to lunch at a Japanese restaurant, and at another time to a<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_165">[Pg 165]</a></span> Chinese, and introduced me to the Indian rendezvous restaurant in the theatrical district. His personality was friendly but abounding in curiosity⁠—a sort of minute methodical curiosity. He made me think of a fearless and faithful little hunting dog. When he came up to my office, his little eyes, like brilliant beads, darted rapidly over everything. And like a permanent surprise he invaded my rooms at all hours and talked in his squeaky grandmotherly voice about Negro problems. He demonstrated a vast interest and sympathy for the Negro racialists and their organizations. I liked Sen Katayama immensely. I was fascinated by his friendly ferreting curiosity. I had associated with many Chinese at home in the West Indies and in London, but Sen Katayama was my first Japanese friend. It was exciting to contrast Chinese and Japanese by the types I had known. Sen Katayama was eager and extrovert, almost too much so, while the Chinese, however friendly, seemed aloof and secret.</p>
			<p>Sen Katayama was in his glory in Red Russia. He was an honorary colonel of the Red army and always appeared at mass meetings in his uniform. The crowds adored him and applauded frantically. He appeared to me somewhat like a harbinger, a symbol of the far eastern element in the new heart of Russia.</p>
			<p>Sen Katayama warmly welcomed me in Moscow and invited me to tea in his nice room in the Lux Hotel. He held an important post in the Eastern Department of the Communist International and because of his extensive traveling and his education and contact with American Negroes he was regarded as an authority on all colored peoples’ affairs. He had more real inside and sympathetic knowledge and understanding of American Negroes than many of the white American Communists who were camping in Moscow.</p>
			<p>
				<span class="pagenum">
					<a id="Page_166">[Pg 166]</a>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>When I explained to Sen Katayama how and why I had come to Russia and of the difficulties I was encountering because of the opposition of the American delegation, he said: “You leave everything to me and we’ll see if they can get you out of here and prevent your attending the Congress. I’ll talk to the Big Four<a id="FNanchor_2_2"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_2_2">[2]</a> about you.”</p>
			<div class="footnotes">
				<p class="ph3">FOOTNOTES:</p>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_2_2"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_2_2"><span class="label">[2]</span></a> Lenin, Trotsky, Zinoviev, and Radek.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<hr class="chap"/>
			<p>
				<span class="pagenum">
					<a id="Page_167">[Pg 167]</a>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
