<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
				<a id="XIX">XIX</a>
			</h2>
			<h2>A Great Celebration</h2>
			<p class="drop"><span class="uppercase">Of</span> all the big Bolshevik leaders, I had desired most to have a personal word from Lenin. I had been amazed in 1920, when I received in London a message from John Reed informing me that Lenin had brought the Negro question before the Communist Congress and inviting me to visit Moscow.</p>
			<p>I had not gone to Moscow then because I did not consider myself qualified to do what John Reed had asked, which was to represent the American Negro group. But now that I was there, I was anxious to get Lenin’s opinion out of his own mouth. But Lenin apparently had become very ill again after his couple of speeches at the Communist and Soviet Congresses in the late fall of 1922. At one of the sessions of the Communist Congress I was seated directly behind Krupskaya, Lenin’s wife, and I was introduced to her by Clara Zetkin (the first woman member of the Reichstag), who was very friendly and affectionate to me. I seized the chance to ask Krupskaya if it were possible to have an interview with Lenin. She said she would see. But nothing came of that. Some time after I visited the office of <i>Pravda</i> with a Communist sympathizer. He was acquainted with Lenin’s sister, who held a position on the staff, and he introduced me to her. I told her that I would like to have a word from Lenin himself and she said frankly that it was impossible, for Lenin was very sick.</p>
			<p>Krupskaya was an extremely plain woman, really ugly.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_207">[Pg 207]</a></span> Max Eastman was so appalled when he saw her that he said, “Lenin would probably get well if he had a pretty girl!” So I said, “Like the Shunamite virgin, who warmed up King David of Israel in his old age, eh?” But we did not think that Lenin was that type of warrior.</p>
			<p>I tried to reach some of the other leaders whom I had not yet met. One day as I was passing through the grounds of the Kremlin with Andreyev, one of the young officials of the Foreign Office, he pointed out to me a strikingly big man wearing high black boots. That, he said, was Stalin, who was chairman of the Committee on National Minorities. It was the first time I heard the name of Stalin, and the information was extremely important. I asked Andreyev if I could meet Stalin. Andreyev said that that was difficult, for Stalin was one of the big Bolsheviks and it was not easy to meet him. But he promised to approach Karakhan about it. Perhaps Andreyev was tardy or unsuccessful in his <i>démarche</i>; at any rate I heard no more of it, and my request vanished from my thoughts when I came in contact with the magnetic personality of Trotsky.</p>
			<p>Trotsky, although apparently so formidable a character, was, with Bukharin, the most approachable of the big Bolsheviks. I was told that any message sent to Trotsky would be certain to receive his personal attention. So I sent in a request to meet the Commissar of War. In a couple of days I got an answer making an appointment and saying that an aide would call to convey me to the Commissary of War.</p>
			<p>Exactly at the appointed hour the following day, as I descended the stairs of the hotel, an official automobile drove up with a military aide and I was escorted to the war department. I passed through a guard of Red sentries and was ushered immediately into Trotsky’s office. Trotsky was wear<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_208">[Pg 208]</a></span>ing a commander’s uniform and he appeared very handsome, genial and gracious sitting at his desk. He said he was learning English and would try to talk to me in that language.</p>
			<p>Trotsky asked me some straight and sharp questions about American Negroes, their group organizations, their political position, their schooling, their religion, their grievances and social aspirations and, finally, what kind of sentiment existed between American and African Negroes. I replied with the best knowledge and information at my command. Then Trotsky expressed his own opinion about Negroes, which was more intelligent than that of any of the other Russian leaders. He did not, like Steklov, the editor of <i>Izvestia</i>, imagine Negroes as a great army for cannon fodder. And unlike Radek, he was not quick to make deductions about the causes of white prejudice against black. Indeed, he made no conclusions at all, and, happily, expressed no mawkish sentimentality about black-and-white brotherhood. What he said was very practical and might sound reformist in the ears of radical American Negroes.</p>
			<p>Trotsky said in effect that the Negro people constituted a backward group, socially, politically and economically, in modern civilization. I remember distinctly that he used the word “backward.” And he stressed the point that Negroes should be educated, should receive not merely academic education, but a broad spreading-out education in all phases of modern industrial life to lift themselves up as a group to a level of equality with the whites. I remember again that he used the word “lift” or “uplift.” And he urged that Negroes should be educated about the labor movement. Finally, he said he would like to set a practical example in his own department and proposed the training of a group of Negroes as officers in the Red army.</p>
			<p>
				<span class="pagenum">
					<a id="Page_209">[Pg 209]</a>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>Before I left, Trotsky asked me to make a summary of my ideas, in writing, for him. This I did, and he wrote out a commentary on it and published both either in <i>Izvestia</i> or in <i>Pravda</i>. Unfortunately I lost the original article and its English translation among other effects somewhere in France. But the gist of it all is given above.</p>
			<p>Also, Trotsky gave me a permit to visit some of the training schools of the Soviet forces. I had not the slightest idea that that meant a passport to a series of inspections and elaborate receptions. I thought I was going to make perhaps a couple of quiet and unobtrusive visits to the military schools. What transpired was amazing, but also embarrassing, for, except for the martial music, I have never been vastly thrilled by military demonstrations.</p>
			<p>For about a month I was fêted by the military forces. I was introduced to military and naval officers and experts. I was shown the mechanism of little guns and big guns. I did a little target practice. I passed through reviews, receptions and banquets, a glamorous parade of militant Red from Moscow to Petrograd.</p>
			<p>It started in Moscow. First I was taken on a visit to the crack Kremlin military schools; then to an ordinary soldiers’ barracks where the men were resting or on fatigue duty, and also to an extraordinary one where everything and everybody was shipshape as if for an inspection by the highest authorities. Next I visited the tactics school, the infantry school, the cavalry school, the artillery school. It was almost three weeks before I got through my Moscow military itinerary. There were intervals of days between the various visits, of course. And there was a continuous big feeding, until I thought my belly would burst. I ate in the soldiers’ mess. I ate in the officers’ mess. I ate with the military professors. I asked for<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_210">[Pg 210]</a></span> <i>kasha</i> and was grandly served, with officers and Communist controllers, an elaborate and most appetizing dish comparable to <i>arroz Valenciana</i> or Moroccan <i>cous-cous</i>. While I was eating it I remembered a long sentimental poem by Rose Pastor Stokes which we had published in <i>The Liberator</i>, in which she sang of her desire to share the Russian peasant’s bowl of <i>kasha</i>. Yet as I remember, her first picturesque gesture in Moscow was the buying of a marvelous mink coat and cap, and she was the smartest woman in the Congress.⁠ ⁠… Thus I learned something new about <i>kasha</i>: that it wasn’t only the peasant’s staple food, but a national food, eaten by all kinds of people, and one which, like rice, may be served in many different and appetizing ways.</p>
			<p>The experience of my military induction ended in a mighty students’ celebration of the anniversary of the Red army. The vast audience flamed to the occasion as if it were charged through and lit up by one great electric current. Many notables appeared before the illuminated demonstration. And at last I was called to the stage. I made a brief martial speech and was applauded for more. But I hadn’t the Russian genius for improvising great appropriate phrases. Someone demanded a poem, and I gave, “If We Must Die.” I gave it in the same spirit in which I wrote it, I think. I was not acting, trying to repeat the sublime thrill of a supreme experience. I was transformed into a rare instrument and electrified by the great current running through the world, and the poem popped out of me like a ball of light and blazed.</p>
			<p>Now, thought I, the amazing military sensation is ended. It was an enjoyable excitement, but it was also a pleasurable relief to be over and done with it. But this audacious adventurer had reckoned without the Red fleet. From Petrograd came an invitation from the Red fleet, which apparently<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_211">[Pg 211]</a></span> meant to rival the Red army in its reception. And so I entrained for Petrograd, accompanied by a military cadet. That was my third going to Petrograd. And each time the city appeared better, revealing more of its grandeur. For, unlike Moscow, Petrograd does not start immediately with color and mazy movement and life compact with a suggestion of Oriental lavishness rioting and ringing upon the senses like the music of golden bells.</p>
			<p>Petrograd is poised and proud, with a hard striking strength like the monument of Peter the Great, and a spaciousness like the Neva. In its somber might it appeared brooding and a little frowning of aspect at first. Many streets were desert stretches, and massive buildings still bore the gaping wounds of the revolution. But when one became a little more acquainted with the city, the great half-empty spaces became impressive with a lonely dignity and beauty. And the Petrograd people were splendid, too, in that setting, outlined more clearly than the Moscow folk. They were like clumps of trees growing together for protection at intervals in a vast plain.</p>
			<p>We arrived in Petrograd on the eve of the celebration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Russian Communist Party. That night I went to the Marinsky Theater to see <i>Prince Igor</i> for the first time, and the thumping performance of the ballet stirred me like strokes of lightning with great claps of thunder. It was so much more wildly extravagant than the Eugen Onegin one I saw in Moscow. In New York I had attended two performances of the Pavlova ballet (I think in 1916), and now I compared them with this Petrograd magnificence. The Pavlova ballet was like birds flying with clipped wings, but the Petrograd <i>Prince Igor</i> was like free birds in full flight. Although I did admire immensely<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_212">[Pg 212]</a></span> the dainty precious Pavlova herself, her company appeared so restrained. I never could work up any enthusiasm for the modernistic contempt of the Russian ballet. The technical excellencies alone thrum on the emotional strings of anyone who has a feeling for geometric patterns.</p>
			<p>Isadora Duncan and I argued and disagreed on this subject for a whole evening at her studio in Nice. She said the Russian Revolution should have abolished the ballet and established the free-limbed dance. I said I preferred to see both schools of dancing have the same freedom for expression. Isadora was even more severe on Negro dancing and its imitations and derivations. She had no real appreciation of primitive folk dancing, either from an esthetic or an ethnic point of view. For her every movement of the dance should soar upward. She spoke beautifully about that uplifted upward movement, although it was all wrong. But when she danced for me it was all right. I had never seen her in her great glory and couldn’t imagine that she could still be wonderful when she was so fat and flabby. But what she did that night was stupendous. I was the only audience besides the pianist. And she danced from Chopin, Tchaikovsky, Wagner and Beethoven. Her face was a series of different masks. And her self was the embodiment of Greek tragedy, <i>un être</i> endowed with divinity.</p>
			<p>The day following the performance of <i>Prince Igor</i>, I paid my respects to the commander of the Baltic fleet. He was a kindly man, and presented me with his photograph. He took me around to the naval preparatory school, the naval gymnasium and the naval academy. The young cadets demanded that I say something. So I told them briefly that I felt singularly honored and happy that my first contact with any fleet should be with the first Red fleet of the world. And that<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_213">[Pg 213]</a></span> although it was a strange life of which I was entirely ignorant, I thought that, if I had to be a fighter, I would rather enlist in the navy than in the army.</p>
			<p>The applause I received was astounding, since what I said was so brief and simple. But quite unwittingly I had stirred the traditional rivalry between army and navy, which may be a little different but no whit less even though they may be Red. But my military escort from Moscow (the only soldier among that fine body of proud and eager young sailors) was not enthusiastic about my quip. I suppose I should have been a little more tactful about the army, since it had first celebrated me as a guest.</p>
			<p>That night started the celebration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Russian Communist Party. The opening meeting was held in the Marinsky Theater. Zinoviev presided. The place was packed. As soon as I appeared in the entrance a group of young cadets bore down on me and, hoisting me upon their shoulders, carried me down the length of the aisle and onto the platform, while great waves of cheers rolled down from the jammed balconies and up from the pit. Zinoviev made a great show, greeting me demonstratively on the stage. The Russians are master showmen.</p>
			<p>From then on the days of my official visit to Petrograd were a progress of processions and speeches and applause and reviews and banquets. The next day marked my visit to the naval base at Kronstadt. Early in the morning an aviator’s fur-lined leather coat and cap and gloves⁠—fit to protect one against the bitterest Siberian blizzard⁠—were brought to my hotel. I breakfasted and togged myself out. Soon afterward a young Red commander called for me in an automobile and we drove to the Petrograd air field. Besides the naval and air officials and photographers, there was quite a crowd gathered<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_214">[Pg 214]</a></span> to see me take off. I posed for the photographers with some of the officers and sailors, with the pilot, and also with McManus, of the British Communist Party, who had come to Petrograd for the anniversary.</p>
			<p>Then I climbed up into the airplane. The man who had once save Lenin’s life (so I was informed) fixed me in place, and the plane sped over the vast field of snow and up into the air. A snowstorm was raging, but I was perfectly protected and felt no fear. Only I could not see anything. The pilot missed his bearings and got a little lost in the storm and we had to come down far from our landing place. The pilot and I got out of the plane and started to walk toward the naval base. The blizzard blew hard and we could see nothing. But it was a fine exhilarating tramp, and, warm in my great boots and fur clothes, I enjoyed the sensation of thinking I was doing a little Arctic stunt.</p>
			<p>At last an automobile came rolling over the hard snow and took us to our landing place. They had been scouting for us, knowing that something must have happened when we did not arrive. At the landing place I found that a crack squad of sailors, fine handsome fellows, had been waiting for us for hours in the blizzard. They were not rigged out, like myself and the pilot, against the bad weather, and were cold. For the life of me I couldn’t understand why a squad of men should have been detailed to await my arrival at the air base, when I was no kind of official. And I had been told that my visit was an informal thing. Right there I remembered my experience in the Pennsylvania railroad service⁠—how often, in the cold steel car out on the track, our crew waited for hours in biting zero weather until the late train arrived and steamed us out. And sometimes we were frost-bitten.</p>
			<p>
				<span class="pagenum">
					<a id="Page_215">[Pg 215]</a>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>My interpreter said that the sailors were expecting a speech. So I said that although I anticipated with joy my visit among them in Kronstadt, I felt sorry that it had been necessary for them to wait for me all those hours in the cold. All the official routine ceremonials were extremely tiresome to me. Even though they were the expression of the workers’ and peasants’ united authority and were therefore simplified, they were nevertheless tedious. I can work up no enthusiasm for official ritual, however necessary, whether it be red or pink or black or white. In Russia I was alertly aware that it was something different from anything that ever was, that officially it was the highest privilege I could have in the world, to be shown the inside working of the greatest social experiment in the history of civilization. I was fired and uplifted by the thundering mass movement of the people, their boisterous surging forward, with their heads held high, their arms outstretched in an eager quest for more light, more air, more space, more glory, more nourishment and comfort for the millions of the masses. But the bureaucratic control left me unmoved. Yet I was conscious that it was the axis of the mighty moving energy of the people, that without it their movement would be futile.</p>
			<p>So I was actually in Kronstadt, the first fortress fired by the signal of the revolution. The features of the fort were covered up with snow, but the splendid men holding it showed me the inside of battleships and submarines, the loading of big guns, and I saw also the educational classes, Communist meetings, recreation halls with motion pictures and feats of gymnastics and dancing, the new revolutionary spirit animating men and officers alike, the simple dignified discipline of rank and precedence, organization and work.</p>
			<p>After a strenuous day, that night I slept soundly on a<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_216">[Pg 216]</a></span> flagship. The next day I motored back to Petrograd. In the afternoon I went to tea with Korney Chukovsky and his sympathetic wife. Chukovsky was a popular liberal journalist and author of the old régime, and was now an equally popular fellow-traveler with the new. He was a radical liberal in his political opinions, but consistently non-political in his writings. Under the old régime he was a contributor to the Moscow newspaper, <i>Russky Slovo</i>, which had a circulation of over a million. He had recently finished a book for children, called <i>Crocodile</i>, which became a best-seller. Chukovsky was a member of a Russian intellectual mission to the Allied capitals, in 1916, I think. He exhibited a large souvenir book of interesting autographs of famous personages: Asquith, Lloyd George, Balfour, Churchill, Poincaré, Millerand, Anatole France, Kipling, H.G. Wells, and many more. I added mine. Chukovsky showed me also a couple of letters from Lenin to Gorky, which he prized highly, and some newspaper cuttings of a critical duel between him and Trotsky over the evaluation of the work of the poet Alexander Blok, who wrote the tragic poem, “The Twelve.” This poem evoked in me something of the spiritual agony of “The Hound of Heaven.” Chukovsky gave me the gist of the controversy between him and Trotsky. Chukovsky had done a fine literary critique of Blok. Trotsky had overemphasized an inoffensive literary reference to the revolution to score a political point. I thought that Chukovsky was right and Trotsky was wrong. Chukovsky went with me to the House of the Intellectuals and introduced me to some of the writers and artists. I remember the names of Metchnikov, son of the scientist and disciple of Pasteur, and the Princess X, who was rich before the revolution, but expropriated now and living with artists<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_217">[Pg 217]</a></span> whom she had befriended during the salad days of the bourgeoisie.</p>
			<p>The next day was fine and clear as crystal. And to make up for what I had missed when we flew to Kronstadt, the aviator came and took me up for an hour’s ride over Petrograd and suburbs. I ended that trip to Petrograd with affectionate farewells from the naval schools. One of them elected me an honorary officer. There, too, I talked with a very interesting officer. He was a graduate of an exclusive Czarist academy, young, exceeding handsome, with very sensitive features. We spoke with difficulty in a kind of lingua franca or <i>petit-negre</i>, to be more precise. He informed me that he had an American wife and invited me to dinner with them. I said it might be an embarrassing matter to his wife, that he should first ask her. He said she knew all about me and had suggested the invitation.</p>
			<p>I wondered about this American wife of the Russian officer. I had been warned to beware of English-speaking bourgeois persons, who might try to pump things out of me. But as I possessed no secrets of any kind and as I desired to experience all the sensations of the new order struggling to extricate itself from the old, I never turned aside from anything or anybody that might possibly add something to the fulness of my exciting adventure.</p>
			<p>I had already met some extraordinary people of the old régime. Besides the Russians, I had encountered a most wonderful Englishwoman, who reminded me of a character out of H.G. Wells’s <i>Food of The Gods</i>. This woman had been an English governess in Russia under the old régime and had married a second-or third-class Russian official. She had a nice apartment in Petrograd. Her beautiful daughter was a clerk in one of the Soviet departments, and sometimes the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_218">[Pg 218]</a></span> mother herself was requisitioned as an interpreter. In her sitting room there was a photograph of the late Czar and Czarina, with the Czarina smudged out. It was a bold thing to have the photograph of the Czar in your sitting room in 1922. But she was an Englishwoman first, even though she had been married to a Russian and was now a Soviet citizen. She said to me: “I preserve the photograph of the Czar because he is the cousin of King George. He was a good man, but his wife was a bad German woman.” Also she had the picture of King George alongside that of Lenin on another wall. “They are the two big men in the world,” she said to me, “and I make my curtsy to them every morning: the ruler of England, my native land, and the ruler of Russia, my adopted country.”</p>
			<p>She was very proud and pleased with my notorious self because I was born a British subject and had lived in London. She didn’t even mind when I said that I did not like the English people as a whole, but admired some individuals. Indeed, she liked it, because that also was her feeling. I spent a long evening in her house and ate very English roast beef and plum pudding. Perhaps too much. For later it was necessary for me to go to the w. c. There I was amazed to see, placed prominently upon the wall, a hand-printed card bearing the motto: “Cleanliness is next to Godliness.” When I returned to the sitting room I complimented her on her nice old English calligraphy, but said that I wondered why she had put up the notice in English, when most of her visitors must be Russians, who did not know the English language. She said, “When the Russians don’t understand, they will ask, because they are a curious people. I have to have these English hints around to remind them that we are a superior people.”</p>
			<p>Eliminating my military aide from Moscow and my officer-<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_219">[Pg 219]</a></span>interpreter of the Baltic fleet, I went alone to the officer’s apartment. His American wife turned out to be a Latin-American. She was unmistakably an octoroon. She was pretty, and, if she had been taller, would have been a great beauty. Nevertheless she had had a pretty time under the old régime and had been celebrated as an exotic flower in smart and expensive bohemian circles. When the revolution overwhelmed the Capital, this exotic creature of the smart set married the young officer who had worshipped her in the hectic pre-revolutionary period, and who had decided, when the revolution came, to serve under the Bolsheviks.</p>
			<p>She spoke nice English. Also, she had prepared a good dinner, with that Russian pink cold soup that isn’t so good to look at, but most excellent to taste, caviar, ham, some sort of boiled meat, and Caucasian wine. She talked a lot about herself and her husband and their son. His son, really, by a first marriage. He was a lad going to high school, and they were worried about him. They said that the boy would never have a chance under the Bolshevik régime. And the officer said that he himself was having only half a chance, that he was absolutely loyal to the Communists, because he was convinced that they were in Russia to stay and that nothing now could take the power away from them. But the Communists did not trust him because he had been a former Czarist officer. They were training the proletarian youths to become officers, and as soon as the proletarian cadets were trained, the old officers would be superseded. I asked him if he were certain that the Czarist officers who had come over wholeheartedly to the revolution would really be kicked out of their positions when the young proletarian officers were trained to take their place. He said that that was positively true, for it was a Communist policy which had been stated<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_220">[Pg 220]</a></span> publicly. I said that I was going to find out, without quoting him. He said that I might.</p>
			<p>However, I did not mention the subject right away to anyone in Petrograd. After ten fleeting days with the glorious Red fleet, seeing and hearing all and believing that all was a dream, I returned to Moscow for the third time. Only when I came back to Petrograd a month later and for the last time, to get a boat for Germany, did I speak about the officer’s case to my friend the Red officer, member of the Communist Party and of the Petrograd Soviet. A young man he was, small, quiet, ordinary-looking and so unobtrustive that you wouldn’t imagine his importance in the Red navy and in the higher Communist councils unless you could appreciate the power of his clear, cold blue and all-seeing eyes. I was interested in what the officer had said because a high-school teacher in Moscow had said the same thing to me, as had also a lady of the old régime who was acting as interpreter when I visited one of the Petrograd courts during a trial.</p>
			<p>I wanted to ascertain whether the members of the defeated bourgeoisie who were working for the Soviets could not be guaranteed the security of their jobs if they were loyal to the Soviets. For it seemed to me that if they felt their positions were insecure and that there was no future for their children under the new régime, they naturally would sabotage the Soviets. The Red officer confirmed the statement of the former Czarist officer: that the bourgeois officers would be superseded as soon as the proletarian cadets could be trained to take their place. I said I thought such a procedure unfair, and that it would make the bourgeois workers enemies of the Soviet system instead of friends, and force them into sabotage. The Red commander said that the Communist controllers were alert to detect any tendency toward sabotage<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_221">[Pg 221]</a></span> on the part of bourgeois employees of the Soviets, and he accused me of bourgeois sentimentality.</p>
			<p>I said that if he had said intellectual sentimentality, he might have been perhaps right, but that I couldn’t have the sentiments of a class I was not born into or educated with. I did not think that there was any such thing as intellectual equality, I told him, and that radicals had a sentimental way of confusing social with intellectual equality. I said further, that I did not believe that talent could spring up easily out of a people, like grass under one’s feet.</p>
			<p>The officer asked who had been talking to me about the matter. I said that nobody in particular, but different persons in Moscow and Petrograd had spoken of it. Which was strictly true. There was a sequel. A year later I was in Paris one afternoon, waiting to cross from the Place de l’Opéra to the Café de la Paix, when I was suddenly touched on the shoulder. I turned and found myself face to face with the officer. We went to the café for a drink. The officer had arrived in France with other officers to recover some Czarist ships which the French government held somewhere down on the North African coast. We reminisced about the splendid Red days we had enjoyed together in Petrograd and Moscow. We talked about our friends of the foreign office and the Comintern. I had already met some of them in Berlin and Paris. And he said, “Do you remember that officer you had dinner with in Petrograd?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” I said, “I remember, but I wasn’t aware that you knew about my having dinner with him.”</p>
			<p>“Well, he is sitting in prison now.”</p>
			<p>“What for?” I asked.</p>
			<p>“Sabotage.”</p>
			<p>
				<span class="pagenum">
					<a id="Page_222">[Pg 222]</a>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>When I returned from Petrograd to Moscow I told Sen Katayama that I wanted to go home. It was the beginning of April. Sen Katayama said that, as an unofficial delegate, I would be given my return fare. He was very pleased with my success and the part he had played in making it possible. He said: “I welcome all the Japanese and Chinese who come here. Some are not Communists, but I see that they are treated right, for I want to make them all Communists.” He said it had been decided that I should not go back by way of Poland, since some of the delegates had had trouble in passing through. A Japanese had been put in prison and lost all his papers. It was considered better for me to go as I had come, by boat.</p>
			<p>I bade my friends goodbye and returned to Petrograd. But the harbor was ice-locked and I had to wait six weeks before a boat could sail. I was put up in the house of the former Grand Duke Alexander, who was a patron of arts. I had the Duke’s own bedroom and study, and his valet to wait on me. The valet was a nice old fellow, but he was like a ghost wandering through the palace. He lived entirely in the past and spoke of the sumptuous days in Berlin and Paris with the Grand Duke. He spoke fluently in French and English. He was shocked at the state of my wardrobe. The only thing in it that he thought fitting for a Grand Duke’s closet was a fine pair of boots which had been given to me by Eugen Boissevain.</p>
			<p>I did not like the palace rooms, especially the study. It reminded me of a cathedral altar. All the walls were rococo, carved and painted in inharmonious brick red. But the cadet who had made himself my orderly thought the rooms very grand. The cadet wanted to do everything, so I dispensed with the valet’s services, but tipped him every week.</p>
			<p>
				<span class="pagenum">
					<a id="Page_223">[Pg 223]</a>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>I got to know Petrograd thoroughly during those weeks. I was shown all the works, among them the great Putilov iron and steel plant and the rubber factory. I liked the visits, but I thought it must have been rather bothersome to the managers of factories who were always pestered by having to take visitors over the plants. I went down into the dungeon of the prison of Sts. Peter and Paul to see the cell in which Prince Kropotkin had been confined. I visited the Department of Nationalities, and Rayeva, the secretary, explained the status of the minority peoples under the Soviets. Also I visited the Department of Woman’s Work at the Smolny Institute, where Nicolayeva, the secretary, told me all about the new regulations concerning marriage and divorce and joint individual property, and how the factory workers were cared for during the period of pregnancy and childbirth. She sent me to a meeting of enthusiastic women workers, who passed a resolution asking that a group of colored working girls visit Russia.</p>
			<p>May Day in Petrograd was a mighty celebration of workers and soldiers and sailors. Never before or since have I seen such a demonstration. Half-empty Petrograd was filled with the shouting of millions who peopled the streets, marching and singing and holding high their red banners of hope. For hours I stood with Zinoviev and other Petrograd leaders in the reviewing stand in the Uritsky Square. And the demonstration so tremendously swept me along that after attending the People’s Theater that night, I could not sleep. I sat down at the table of the Grand Duke Vladimir Alexander, looking out on the Neva, with the gorgeous silver of the beautiful white night of Petrograd shining upon its face, and wrote until dawn. I was happy. Petrograd had pulled a poem out of me.</p>
			<p>
				<span class="pagenum">
					<a id="Page_224">[Pg 224]</a>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>The poem was published in the Petrograd <i>Pravda</i> and reprinted all over Russia. It was the last thing I wrote in Russia. I was overwhelmed with praise. The praise of the Communists was expected. I was their guest. But I was gratified most by the praise of the Petrograd literati. For they were a proud lot, cold or passive to the revolution. The Russian translator of Walt Whitman said that I had composed a classic. But they had it in translation. I think it should be exhibited here in the original.</p>
			<p>
				<i>PETROGRAD: MAY DAY, 1923</i>
			</p>
			<p>
				<i>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">The Neva moves majestically on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">The sun-rays playing on her breast at seven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">From her blue bosom all winter’s snow-slabs gone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Now ripples curl where yesterday lay riven</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Great silver oblongs chiselled by the hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Of Spring that bellies through Earth’s happy womb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">To glad and flower the long, long pregnant land!</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Where yesternight a veil of winter gloom</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Shrouded the city’s splendid face⁠—today</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">All life rejoices for the First of May.</span>
					<br/>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">The Nevsky glows ablaze with regal Red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Symbolic of the triumph and the rule</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Of the new Power now lifting high its head</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Above the place where once a sceptered fool</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Was mounted by the plunderers of men</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">To awe the victims while they schemed and robbed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">The marchers shout again! again!! again!!!</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">The stones, where once the hearts of martyrs sobbed</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Their blood, are sweet unto their feet today,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">In celebration of the First of May.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="pagenum">
						<a id="Page_225">[Pg 225]</a>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Cities are symbols of man’s upward reach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Man drawing near to man in close commune,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">And mighty cities mighty lessons teach</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Of man’s decay or progress, late or soon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">And many an iron-towered Babylon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Beneath the quiet golden breath of Time</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Has vanished like the snow under the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Leaving no single mark in stone or rhyme</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">To flame the lifted heart of man today,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">As Petrograd upon the First of May.</span>
					<br/>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Oh many a thoughtful romance-seeking boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Slow-fingering the leaves of ancient glory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Is stirred to rapture by the tales of Troy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">And each invigorate, vein-tingling story</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Of Egypt and of Athens and of Rome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Where slaves long toiled for knights and kings reap.</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">But in the years, the wondrous years to come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">The heart of youth in every land will leap</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">For Russia that first made national the day⁠—The</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">embattled workers’ day⁠—The First of May.</span>
					<br/>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Jerusalem is fading from men’s mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">And sacred cities holding men in thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Are crumbling in the new thought of mankind⁠—The</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">pagan day, the holy day for all!</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Oh, Petrograd, oh proud triumphant city,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">The gateway to the strange, awakening East,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Where warrior-workers wrestled without pity</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Against the power of magnate, monarch, priest⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">World Fort of Struggle, hold from day to day</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">The flaming standards of the First of May!</span>
					<br/>
				</i>
			</p>
			<hr class="chap"/>
			<p>
				<span class="pagenum">
					<a id="Page_226">[Pg 226]</a>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
