<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
				<a id="XXVIII">XXVIII</a>
			</h2>
			<h2>Hail and Farewell to Morocco</h2>
			<p class="drop"><span class="uppercase">I suppose</span> every man who achieves something worthwhile naturally attracts some woman. I was interested in Carmina, who had a white lover. Carmina was a pretty colored lady who had recently deserted the best circles of Harlem for Paris. I liked Carmina. She had lived her life a lot, even as I, and neither of us could reproach the other about the past. But when Louise Bryant saw us together she scolded me. “That girl is not your type,” she said. “Why don’t you go on living as you always did? Why do you have to go around with a female on your arm, simply because you have written a successful novel?” I said that perhaps it was nothing more than “male conceit.” Louise Bryant laughed and said, “Take care you don’t spoil yourself by doing the thing that every man thinks he ought to do because of male conceit.”</p>
			<p>Louise Bryant and Carmina did not like each other. The three of us were spending a convivial evening together and, feeling gallant, I tried to find something to praise in Louise’s appearance. She had been to a hairdresser’s that afternoon and her neatly shingled hair was gleaming black. I said, “Louise, your hair is very nice tonight.” Louise smiled her appreciation. But Carmina said, in a loud whisper, “Can’t you see it’s dyed?” A blighting frost descended on the party.</p>
			<p>It was a sweet relief to give up for awhile discussing problems of race and art for an atmosphere of pure sensuality and amorous intrigue. Carmina also had been fed up with<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_325">[Pg 325]</a></span> too much race in the upper circles of Harlem, which was why she had fled to Paris. One night I was drunk and maudlin in Montparnasse and Louise Bryant shrieked at me in high intoxicated accents, shaking her forefinger at me, “Go away and write another book. Go home to Harlem or back to Africa, but leave Paris. Get a grip on yourself.” She looked like the picture of an old emaciated witch, and her forefinger was like a broomstick. Perhaps it was her better unconscious self warning me, for she also could not get a grip on herself and get away from Paris.</p>
			<p>I heeded the warning. I started off for Africa. But I lingered a long time in Spain. The weeks turned into months. From Madrid I went to Andalusia and visited Cordova and Granada again, then went back to Barcelona. A French radical friend wrote chidingly about my preference for Spain, so medieval and religion-ridden. I wrote him that I expected radical changes in medieval Spain sooner than in nationalistic France. That was no prophecy. The thing was in the air; students mentioned it to you on the café terraces; waiters spoke of it in the pensions and restaurants; chauffeurs spoke of their comrades murdered in Morocco by King Alfonso; bank clerks said a change was coming soon, and even guides had something to say. That was in the winter of 1929⁠–⁠30. I was in Spain early in 1930 when the dictatorship of Primo de Rivera collapsed. In the spring of 1931 I was in Spanish Morocco when King Alfonso abdicated, and in Tetuán I witnessed a wonderful demonstration of amity and fraternity between the native Moorish and civilian Spanish populations. There in Africa I hankered after Spain again and indited these three sonnets for Barcelona:</p>
			<p>
				<span class="pagenum">
					<a id="Page_326">[Pg 326]</a>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<i>BARCELONA</i>
			</p>
			<p>1</p>
			<p>
				<i>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">In Barcelona town they dance the nights</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Along the streets. The folk, erecting stands</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Upon the people’s pavements, come together</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">From pueblo, barrio, in families,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Lured by the lilting playing of the bands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Rejoicing in the balmy summer weather,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">In spreading rings they weave fine fantasies</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Like rare mosaics of many-colored lights.</span>
					<br/>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Kindled, it glows, the magical Sardana,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">And sweeps the city in a glorious blaze.</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">The garrison, the sailors from the ships,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">The workers join and block the city’s ways,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Ripe laughter ringing from intriguing lips,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Crescending like a wonderful hosanna.</span>
					<br/>
				</i>
			</p>
			<p>2</p>
			<p>
				<i>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Oh admirable city from every range!</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Whether I stand upon your natural towers⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">With your blue carpet spreading to their feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Its patterns undulate between the bars⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Watching until the tender twilight hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Its motion cradling soft a silver fleet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Or far descend from underneath the stars,</span>
					<br/>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Down⁠—to your bottoms sinister and strange:</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">The nights eccentric of the Barrio Chino,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">The creatures of the shadows of the walls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="pagenum">
						<a id="Page_327">[Pg 327]</a>
					</span>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Gray like the savage caricatures of Goya,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">The chulos of the abysmal dancing halls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">And, in the garish lights of La Criolla,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">The feminine flamenco of El Niño.</span>
					<br/>
				</i>
			</p>
			<p>3</p>
			<p>
				<i>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Oh Barcelona, queen of Europe’s cities,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">From dulcet thoughts of you my guts are twisted</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">With bitter pain of longing for your sights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">And for your hills, your picturesque glory singing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">My feet are mutinous, mine eyes are misted.</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Upon my happy thoughts your harbor lights</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Are shimmering like bells melodious ringing</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">With sweet cadenzas of flamenco ditties.</span>
					<br/>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">I see your movement flashing like a knife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Reeling my senses, drunk upon the hues</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Of motion, the eternal rainbow wheel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Your passion smouldering like a lighted fuse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">But more than all sensations oh, I feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Your color flaming in the dance of life.</span>
					<br/>
				</i>
			</p>
			<p>I was ready to begin another book, and a Moorish friend had put his house in Fez at my disposal. But as soon as I landed in Fez, toward the end of 1930, the French police pounced upon me. I had arrived there a few days before the official visit of President Domergue of France. The police declared I should leave Fez immediately. They said British authorities had furnished proof that I was a political agent; that I had carried on propaganda among the British military forces and also visited Soviet Russia. I went to the British Consulate for further information. There I was told that they possessed no information about me, but that I must obey the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_328">[Pg 328]</a></span> local authority. They wanted to send me back to Europe. I refused to go. I said I would leave Fez if I were forced to, but I was determined to remain awhile in Africa. So I went to Casablanca and from there to Tangier.</p>
			<p>Months later a merchant from Fez came to Tangier and hinted why I had been obliged to leave. He said that Moroccan custom permitted anyone who had a serious grievance to complain to the sultan in person when he made an official visit to a city. And as Morocco was a protectorate of France, any person who desired could present his complaint to the sultan of France during his official visit. But the police had a system of banishing real malcontents for a short period during the sultan’s visit. The police had feared that I might seize an opportunity to complain to the French sultan, President Domergue, about the unjust treatment I received during my first visit to Fez! And so they had ordered me to leave.</p>
			<p>In Tangier I rented a Dar Hassani (native house) and went to work on <i>Gingertown</i>, a book of short stories. Mail for me had accumulated in Paris. When it arrived there was a little pile of letters from Carmina. She chided me for deserting her and said that she, too, wanted to go to Africa; that she was sick of Europe and growing worse. She had met all the leading bohemians, writers and artists, more than I ever met. She was a frequent visitor to the Rue Fleurus and was hooked up with one of Gertrude Stein’s young men. But she was disgusted with him; he was just a poor white mouse, she said. She was sick of it all and wanted to come to me.</p>
			<p>Come to me! I was exceeding flattered, forgetting all about “male conceit.” The idea of Carmina leaving her white man for me was tantalizing. She had introduced him to me in Paris, and he had said, “<i>J’ai le béguin pour toi</i>.” I said,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_329">[Pg 329]</a></span> “<i>Merci, mais je n’ai pas</i>.” His bloodless white skin was nauseating. He had no color.</p>
			<p>Carmina had been traveling around a lot herself and confided to me that she was keeping a diary of her <i>randonnée</i>. She thought I might help her to publish it.</p>
			<p>And so Carmina came to Morocco. It was just at the commencement of <i>l’Aïd El Kebir</i> (the Big Feast), when the Moroccans cut the throats of thousands of lambs and the air is filled with their plaintive bleating and the crooked streets are running with their blood. We went to live in my little native house at that time of the Great Sacrifice. In the beginning it was nice, being together and working together. People liked Carmina. She was pretty. The Spanish liked the name Carmina because it had a little of Carmen in it. And the Moors liked Mina because it was a native name derived from the lovely sweet flower, Jasmine, which in Morocco is Yasmina, a name often given to Negresses and Mulattresses. And I liked her being so much admired.</p>
			<p>I showed Carmina how to make Moroccan tea with mint and other flavorful shrubs. And a native woman friend cooked us big bowls of <i>cous-cous</i> in olive oil with the tenderest pieces of lamb and chicken. The Aframerican honeymoon in Africa was quite happy, until Carmina announced that she desired to marry me. But I couldn’t because I wasn’t divorced and I expected some day to return to America.</p>
			<p>And now there was no peace between us. Carmina insisted she had to marry, to satisfy her mother, who was a Christian church-loving woman. In anger I said indiscreetly: “Why didn’t you marry your white man in Paris.” She said she would show me she could marry him. And one day she announced that her former white lover was coming to Morocco to marry her. I said I thought that that wasn’t a bad idea,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_330">[Pg 330]</a></span> since she had to be married. I meant it. But my attitude turned Carmina raging. She said the right kind of man would be jealous. She was right, I suppose. But even from the angle of pure passion only I couldn’t imagine myself being jealous of Carmina’s white lover. And frankly I was interested in seeing her marry her white man from a social point of view. Because the story of Negroes in civilization is one of white men loving black women and giving them mulatto children, while they preferred to marry their own white women. Carmina said she was a modern woman and that if I were truly a radical and bohemian, I would not have such reactionary ideas about marriage. I asked her why she was not modern enough to live with a black man as she had lived with a white man. Also I said I was thinking in black-and-white, and that as marriage has a social value and her white man was of the better class, I’d like to see her marry him. Mixed marriages were mostly one-sided, colored men marrying white women; I’d also like to see white men marrying colored women, I told her. White men must have some social reason for not marrying the Negro women in whose flesh they find delight.</p>
			<p>My reasoning infuriated Carmina, and our relationship became intolerable. She left me. Perhaps Carmina’s white mouse had his special white fascination. I have known women who used to be afraid of mice and who in later years made pets of rats. Carmina’s Nordic came, but he didn’t marry. After being surfeited with loving, he left her still a spinster. I suppose it is easier for some women (like some men) to have than to hold.</p>
			<p>I have read white writers and heard white men who romantically said that Negro women will not be faithful to white men. And there are Negro writers who write vicarious<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_331">[Pg 331]</a></span> tales of colored girls ditching rich white men for black sheiks. I wonder what actual experience such colored writers have. All bunk. And my experience is not limited to just one. I know that in the West Indies the black and brown women become the faithful mistresses of Europeans.</p>
			<p>So Carmina left me for a white skin. I don’t think because it was so hot and I so cold. But the white skin is a symbol of money and power. In North Africa the native social system holds out against the European assault simply because the native women are confined in their harems. To modern thinking minds this is objectionable. Yet it is the native fanaticism in sex and religion which makes North Africa a little more wholesome than the rest of that fatal continent.</p>
			<p>Some folk’s remedy for lost love is immediately to love again. But if it is a big love, that remedy is like swilling beer to get rid of a champagne hangover. For if one has a passionate love in his system, I don’t think indulging in lesser and indiscriminate loving helps to rid one of it. At least not for me. My way is to face it and live it down in hard work, sweat it out of my system. And so to get rid of the feeling and the odor of lost love, I gave up the little house and went for a few months up in the mountain fastness of Xauen in Spanish Morocco. There I finished my book, <i>Gingertown</i>.</p>
			<p>When I came back I leased a little house in the country by the sea, about three miles out of Tangier. I found a little brown native girl to take care of the house. She brought her mother along, so that she could look her own people in the face without flinching. There also was a boy on a bicycle to run errands. And we all cultivated the garden and lived comfortably on twenty-five dollars each month.</p>
			<p>One day when I was not at home, Carmina rode out there and pushed herself into the house. Both mother and daugh<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_332">[Pg 332]</a></span>ter were very nonplussed by the American brown girl, who looked exactly like their own people, yet did not dress like them nor talk their language. Nevertheless, undaunted, they barred the way to my workroom. Carmina fired a volley of Americanisms and departed. Some days later it was reported to me in the Petit Socco of Tangier that she said she had told the woman she ought to be horsewhipped. Also, she had read a great book called <i>Mother India</i> about those awfully uncivilized Asiatics, and she wished somebody would write a Mother Morocco about the barbarous Africans.</p>
			<p>Twice a week I tramped into town and spent the night in the native cafés listening to the alluring singing of Andalusian songs to the accompaniment of lute and mandolin. It was interesting to note that Spanish and French words and musical phrases were slipping into the native melodies. Some day a wonderful new music is destined to come out of North Africa.</p>
			<p>The life was a little lazy. I did not plunge deep enough down into the native ways to touch the depths of that tribal opposition to other opposing groups which gave strength and meaning to their common existence.</p>
			<p>So I lived on the edge of the native life, among them, but not one of them. I could have become a member by marrying into a family, as my two Senegalese friends had done. But religion was an obstacle. I did not want to take a backward step in that direction. I had interesting conversations with my friend Sidi Abdallah, a poet, who was educated in Egypt and was conceded by the natives to be the most highly educated and broad-minded Moroccan of the town. He assured me that Islam was all-embracing and could accommodate free-thinkers. It was he who started me off on the great story of Antar, informing me of the high-lights that<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_333">[Pg 333]</a></span> were not hinted of in the Encyclopedia Britannica. He told me too that the father of free-thought was the Moslem, Averrhoës, who lived in Spain in the twelfth century; that he was the real founder of pantheism and of modern European free thought. And he told me his story, how he was imprisoned and flogged by the Caliph of Cordova, because he had said that the Caliph had no divine authority.</p>
			<p>Sidi Abdallah was very eloquent. He resented the Christian representation of Islam as the religion of the sword. It was the religion of social equality, for all humanity, he said. It was the liberal and liberating religion, when the orthodox Christians were persecuting dissident Christians and pagans. Arabia was a land of refuge for the dissident Christians and Jews and pagans fleeing Christian persecution. “Our great Prophet dreamed of a religion of reconciliation in a world where all men would be like brothers, worshipping the same God,” he said. “Take the Guinea fetishists, for example; they are primitive magicians and steeped in superstition, yet we accept and tolerate them as Moslems because they acknowledge Mohammed as the prophet.”</p>
			<p>All that Sidi Abdallah said was fine and vastly illuminating. I had a better conception of Islam after knowing him. The philosophy was all right, but the fact was that Islam, as it was practiced in North Africa when I observed it, was intolerant and fanatic. The Moors frankly admitted that perhaps Morocco was the most fanatically Islamic country in the West.</p>
			<p>It was better, I thought, to live as I did without getting too deeply involved, and thinking too much, because I experienced more of purely physical happiness than at any time in my life.</p>
			<p>When Carmina and I separated she circulated the report<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_334">[Pg 334]</a></span> that I disliked white people. The natives were puzzled about that, because large numbers of them are as white as some Spanish and French. In the Riff and other mountain regions there are blue-eyed and blonde-haired types resembling Nordics, except that they are rather bronzed. But they are all remarkably free of any color obsessions or ideas of discrimination. They are Africans. The others are <i>roumi</i> or Europeans. So they thought that Carmina meant that I did not like the <i>roumi</i> or Europeans. And that did not displease them. They opened their doors wider for me. And I did not mind the report, for I was not particularly interested in European society in North Africa.</p>
			<p>But I did have “white” friends (if the Moors do not object to the use of that phrase) from the white colony. They were all Americans, some of whom are interestingly friendly to colored people abroad. They delighted in flaunting their intimacy with colored persons in the face of the smug European colony. Also there were visitors from Europe.</p>
			<p>My first and oldest French friend, Pierre Vogein, came to see me in 1932. He and his wife had come over the previous summer, but I was away in Xauen. Also Max Eastman and his wife, Eliena Krylenko, visited me the same year. And there came some of the Gertrude Stein young men. Carmina’s young man had been a kind of protégé of Gertrude Stein. Carmina said she had been welcome at Gertrude Stein’s at first. But when she and the young man became seriously enamored of each other, Gertrude Stein grew cold to them. Carmina said she could not understand Gertrude Stein being a novelist, for she seemed almost incapable of understanding life. She said Miss Stein saw black as black and white as white, without any shades, and so it was impossible to understand one like herself, for she was neither black nor white.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_335">[Pg 335]</a></span> She said Miss Stein did not seem to realize that chameleon was a fundamental feature of life; that serpents shed their skins and even the leopard might change its spots for a woman. But Miss Stein was reactionary: she did not believe in change.</p>
			<p>Carmina was considered one of the most intellectual women in Harlem. Carmina said that Gertrude Stein reproached her young man, telling him that if he were seriously interested in Negroes he should have gone to Africa to hunt for an authentic one. Carmina said she did not know what more authentic than herself Miss Stein desired. For besides having some of the best white blood mingled with black in her veins, which were blue, she came from the best Negroid middle-class stock, and Gertrude Stein was also only middle-class.</p>
			<p>An interesting couple of visitors from Paris was Monsieur Henri Cartier-Bresson, and his friend, an American colored woman. He was a Norman, and a painter and photographer. He had studied at Oxford and had a suggestion of upper-class English something about him. He had a falsetto voice which was not unpleasant, but it wasn’t so pleasant to listen to it reiterating that its possessor could fancy only Negro women because he preferred the primitive. That falsetto voice just did not sound authentic and convincing to me.</p>
			<p>And if a white man is fond of black women, why should he be declaring his liking to <i>me</i>! The penchant of white men for black women is nothing new. It has given the world an arresting new type of humanity, generally known as mulatto. M. Bresson had hunted all over West Africa in search of the pure primitive. And he had returned to Paris to find an American brown woman nearly twice his age and as sophisticated as Carmina, but not so pretty.</p>
			<p>
				<span class="pagenum">
					<a id="Page_336">[Pg 336]</a>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>M. Bresson brought his lady over to lunch at my house. I was living alone then like an ascetic, which I found necessary to the completion of a new book. But I asked Mr. Charles Ford over to meet my guests. He came in his bathing suit, walking his way down the peninsular strip which lay between the river and the bay, and swimming over to my house. He took one look at the pair and left. The lady said, “He smells like a down-home.” I said, “Yes, but he’s not a cracker.” Later Ford explained that his precious artistic sense of the harmony of form and rhythm had suffered too great a shock.</p>
			<p>Our conversation turned upon M. Bresson’s unwillingness to carry on with his father the business of an industrialist. M. Bresson’s colored lady thought that he would be more interesting as a business man than as a modern photographer. She said he was not so artistic as he was plain lazy; that he was so lazy he wouldn’t even pick up his pajamas from the floor.</p>
			<p>I said that there at the head of Africa in Morocco, hard by the ancient civilized Mediterranean, the natives did not worry about pajamas. Going to bed was an effortless thing. And I asked M. Bresson whether among the pure primitives (if there were any left) in the middle or the bottom of Africa, one had to worry about pajamas. Or if one might be satisfied with a broad banana leaf. M. Bresson was not so sure. He had returned all the way to Paris to find his pure primitive and bring her to Morocco to show me. Well, in less than a couple of years I heard of M. Bresson in Mexico with a Mexican girl. Perhaps when his protracted period of adolescence has passed he will finally finish like a cool Norman and practical Frenchman by marrying a woman of his country and his class.</p>
			<p>I am a little tired of hearing precious bohemian white men<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_337">[Pg 337]</a></span> protesting their admiration and love for Negro women and the rest. Yet many of them are shocked at the idea of intimacy between a black man and a white woman, because of their confused ideas of erotic attraction. Perhaps I am hypercritical in detecting a false accent in their enthusiasm. But it strikes me as being neither idealistic or realistic. I know it is a different thing from the sympathy and friendship that the humane and tolerant members of one group or nation or race of people feel for the members of another. And I know it is different from that blind urge of sexual desire which compelled white men to black women during the age of black slavery in the Occident (and perhaps in Africa today), and created an interesting new type of humanity. The performance of such men was not actuated by false and puerile theories of sex. I have a certain respect for them. But these nice modern faddists⁠—they give me a feeling of white lice crawling on black bodies.</p>
			<hr class="tb"/>
			<p>The most interesting visitor of them all was the American writer and protégé of Gertrude Stein, Charles Henri Ford, who published a queer book of adolescence in Paris under the rather puritan title of <i>The Young and Evil</i>. Young Mr. Ford suddenly dropped in upon me one day when a group of tribesmen were killing a steer in my garden. They cooked the liver in the yard and roasted some of the meat on skewers and invited him to join us in the feast. He was like a rare lily squatting in among the bearded and bournoused natives, and he enjoyed it. When he left in the evening I gave him a chunk of meat from what had been given to me.</p>
			<p>He had been in Italy with a Cuban girl. When they came to Madrid she found a young Spanish lover and the three of them came on to Tangier. He came to see me soon again<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_338">[Pg 338]</a></span> and I invited some of the younger Moors and a few fatmahs to meet him. They all rather liked him. They said he looked wonderfully like the cinema portraits of Marlene Dietrich.</p>
			<p>He came again and again, evidently liking my little isolated house on the river. He was likable enough, and we gave a few native parties for him. The young men brought their lutes and mandolins and sang Andalusian melodies, and the girls danced. One evening Mr. Ford came over early and excitedly told me that the young men were bringing a very beautiful fatmah⁠—prettier than any he had seen at my place. I said I couldn’t think of any pretty girl of that class whom Mr. Ford knew and I had not seen before. He said he felt certain I hadn’t seen her. So we waited expectantly until the carriages arrived with the party. When the girl unveiled she turned out to be the first little one who had worked for me when I arrived in Tangier. We were both very surprised. She had lost the quaint native freshness of our earlier acquaintanceship and already she had developed like a fine and hardened cashew-nut. She was not aware that the joy-makers were bringing her to my new place. But she was not in the slightest embarrassed. She established herself as temporary hostess as well as guest and was just as charming in the rôle as she had been efficient as a little housekeeper.⁠ ⁠… Our fiesta lasted two days. The Moroccans are a magical barbaric people, if one isn’t too civilized to appreciate the subtlety and beauty of their barbaresques. When at last I decided to return to America, in homage to them I indited: “A Farewell to Morocco.”</p>
			<p>
				<span class="pagenum">
					<a id="Page_339">[Pg 339]</a>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<i>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Oh wistful and heartrending earth, oh land</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Of colors singing symphonies of life!</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Myself is like a stone upon my spirit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Reluctant, passing from your sunny shore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 6.5em;">Oh native colors,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 6.5em;">Pure colors aglow</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 6.5em;">With magic light.</span>
					<br/>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Mysterious atmosphere whose elements,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Like hands inspired by a magnetic force,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Touched so caressingly my inmost chords,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">How strangely I was brought beneath your spell!</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 6.5em;">But willingly</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 6.5em;">A captive I</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 6.5em;">Remained to be.</span>
					<br/>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Oh friends, my friends! When Ramadan returns</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">And daily fast and feasting through the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">With chants and music honey-dripping sweets,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">And fatmahs shading their flamenco feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 6.5em;">My thoughts will wing</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 6.5em;">The waves of air</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 6.5em;">To be with you.</span>
					<br/>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Oh when the cannon sounds to breaks the fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">The children chorus madly their relief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">And you together group to feast at last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">You’ll feel my hungry spirit there in your midst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 6.5em;">Released from me</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 6.5em;">A prisoner,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 6.5em;">To fly to you.</span>
					<br/>
					<br/>
					<span class="pagenum">
						<a id="Page_340">[Pg 340]</a>
					</span>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">And when you go beneath the orange trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">To mark and serenade the crescent growth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">With droning lute and shivering mandolin</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">And drop the scented blossoms in your cups!</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 6.5em;">Oh make one tune,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 6.5em;">One melody</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 6.5em;">Of love for me.</span>
					<br/>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Keeping your happy vigil through the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">With tales and music whiling by the hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">You may recall my joy to be with you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Until the watchers passed from house to house</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 6.5em;">And bugle call</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 6.5em;">And muffled drum</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 6.5em;">Proclaimed the day!</span>
					<br/>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">When liquid-eyed Habeeb draws from the lute</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">A murmur golden like a thousand bees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Embowelled in a sheltering tropic tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">With honey brimming in the honeycomb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 6.5em;">The tuneful air</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 6.5em;">Will waft the sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 6.5em;">Across to me.</span>
					<br/>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Notes soared with the dear odor of your soil</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">And like its water cooling to my tongue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Haunting me always like a splendid dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Of vistas opening to an infinite way</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 6.5em;">Of perfect love</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 6.5em;">That angels make</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 6.5em;">In Paradise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="pagenum">
						<a id="Page_341">[Pg 341]</a>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Habeeb, Habeeba, I may never return</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Another sacred fast to keep with you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">But when your Prince of months inaugurates</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Our year, my thoughts will turn to Ramadan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 6.5em;">Forgetting never</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 6.5em;">Its tokens</span>
					<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 6.5em;">Unforgettable.</span>
					<br/>
				</i>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">—<i>Mektoub.</i></span>
				<br/>
			</p>
			<hr class="chap"/>
			<p>
				<span class="pagenum">
					<a id="Page_342">[Pg 342]</a>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
